---
title:  "Domain Name System (DNS) Part 1"
date:   2019-03-15
layout: post
category: network
---
This is the first part *Domain Name System (DNS)*. [Click here to see part 2](/network/2019/03/17/dns-2.html).

## Definition 
**Domain Name System** is:
  * A distributed database implemented in a **hierarchy of DNS servers**, and 
  * An application-layer protocol running over UDP on port 53 that allows hosts to query the distributed database. 

~ {{ site.data.ref.topdown}}

It is specified in [RFC 1034] and [RFC 1035].

## How DNS Works

DNS is not just any one DNS server but a network of DNS servers. Let's look at how the DNS resolves a **domain name** like salesdepartment.mycompany.com.

  1. Host --> **Local DNS server**
  2. Local DNS server --> **Root DNS server**
     1. Q: Do you know the IP address of salesdepartment.mycompany.com?
     2. A: No I don't, but this **Top Level Domain DNS server** is in charge of .com top level domain.
  3. Local DNS server --> the .com **Top Level Domain DNS server**
     1. Q: Do you know the IP address of salesdepartment.mycompany.com?
     2. A: No I don't, but this **Intermediate DNS server** is in charge of mycompany.com domain.
  4. Local DNS server --> the .mycompany.com intermediate DNS server
     1. Q: Do you know the IP address of salesdepartment.mycompany.com?
     2. A: No I don't, but this **Authoritative DNS server** does.
  5. Local DNS server --> **Authoritative DNS server**
     1. Q: Do you know the IP address of salesdepartment.mycompany.com?
     2. A: Yes, it's at <some-IP-address>.

**Note** Local DNS server is genenerally not considered part of the hieararchy of DNS servers.
