---
title: "Site Reliability Part 1"
date: 2019-12-08
layout: post
category: site-reliability
---

At my company, my title is a `DevOps Engineer`. For now, I accept that `DevOps` is not a role, but rather a culture. But that's not important right now.

What's more notable is that my job involves a lot more than just building pipelines. To be precise, my day-to-day tasks mostly include:

1. Maintaining and enhancing CI & CD pipeline - modifying Jenkinsfile...
2. Deploying - modifying Dockerfiles, docker-compose, building and deploying custom builds...
3. IT - whitelisting IP addresses, grant ssh accesses...
4. Ops - monitoring, troubleshooting incidents...

among other things.

As such, I have realized that what I do is not `DevOps`. When you hear `DevOps`, you think CI & CD. But there's this one critical mission that I'm also assigned - `Ops`.

> Essentially, if the server suffers outtage, I'll have to bring it back up and report.

The bad news is we have suffered many outtages lately that led me to think there's something wrong with the way our `DevOps` team works.

Enters `Site Reliability Engineer`.

I heard this word sometimes ago and thought `SRE` is going to be in my career path eventually, but did not really look into it. Now that Ops works are giving me headache, I know it's time I read about this.

I'm following a book from Google, called

> Site Reliability Engineering - How Google Runs Production Systems

Having read only the Preface and Chapter 1 but I can tell it's a worthwhile reading.

That's why I'm starting this series - to follow this book and optionally put in my two cents where possible.

I want to update it at least once a month (promise to self).
