---
title: "Chapter 1 Introduction Part 1"
date: 2019-12-12
layout: post
category: site-reliability
---

## The Concept of Error Budget

The conflict between Ops and Dev is that one side wants to keep things running while the other favors changes or new features.

The thing is:

> 100% is the wrong reliability target for basically everything

Then how much is the right reliability target for the system? - ask the Product Team:

- What level of availability will the users be happy with, given how they use the product?
- What alternatives are available to users who are dissatisfied with the product’s availability?
- What happens to users’ usage of the product at different availability levels?

The business/product people must establish the system's avaiability target. `Error budget` is one minus that. It's the permitted unavaiability, which can be spent on anything.

> SRE’s goal is no longer "zero outages"; rather, SREs and product developers aim to spend the error budget getting maximum feature velocity. [...] An outage is no longer a "bad" thing—it is an expected part of the process of innovation, and an occurrence that both development and SRE teams manage rather than fear.

## My thoughts

In my company, the one who keeps error from crawling onto prod production is the `QA` team. We - the `DevOps` people are usually against changes on production. Currently, we're having planned downtime of about 2 hours every two weeks for release.

So, the error budjet doesn't sound very appropriate to us (maybe our QA team would be more interested in this concept).

However, the talk pointed to an interesting idea:

> 100% is the wrong reliability target for basically everything
