---
title:  "Domain Name System (DNS) Part 2"
date:   2019-03-17
layout: post
category: network
---
## DNS Server Hierarchy

Typically, there are three levels in the DNS server hierarchy

1. **Root DNS server**: as of this writing, there are 13 root DNS servers, [more here](https://www.iana.org/domains/root/servers). These return IP addresses of top level domain DNS servers.
2. **Top level domain DNS server**: these DNS servers are in charge of `.com` or `.edu`... top level domains. They return IP address of authoritative DNS servers.
3. **Authoritative DNS server**: 
>  Every organization with publicly accessible hosts (such as Web servers and mail servers) on the Internet must provide publicly acces- sible DNS records that map the names of those hosts to IP addresses. An organiza- tion’s authoritative DNS server houses these DNS records. ~ {{site.data.ref.topdown}}

## DNS Resource Record

**Resource record**s (RR) are hostname-to-IP address mappings that are stored in the DNS system.

Each RR contains four fields: Name, Value, Type, TTL.

There are 04 types of records. The following table summarises each record type and what kind of mapping it provides.

Record type | Mapping 
----- | -----
A | hostname to IP address
CNAME | alias hostname to canonical name
NS | domain to hostname of authoritative DNS server
MS | alias hostname to canonical mail server's name

From {{site.data.ref.topdown}}

> If a DNS server is authoritative for a particular hostname, then the DNS server will contain a Type A record for the hostname. 

> If a server is not authoritative for a host- name, then the server will contain a Type NS record for the domain that includes the hostname; it will also contain a Type A record that provides the IP address of the DNS server in the Value field of the NS record.

## Inserting Records into the DNS Database

In order to obtain a usable domain name, you need to register that domain at a **registrar**.

> A registrar is a commercial entity that verifies the uniqueness of the domain name, enters the domain name into the DNS database (as discussed below), and collects a small fee from you for its services. 

Registering a domain with a registra involving providing the name and IP address of your authoritative DNS servers. The registra will then make an NS record (domain -> authoritative DNS server's hostname) and an A-type (DNS server's hostname -> its IP address) in *each* of the corresponding top level domain DNS servers.