---
title: "Kernel - 1"
date: 2020-10-25
layout: post
category: linux
---

Kernel land is full of wonders and treasure and is the land of freedom in its truest form. As I left my home town - peaceful user land to embark on this adventure, I thought keeping a journal to record the various extraodinary phenomenons of the mystical land is a good way to keep my sanity from drifting away...

# The Elders' Scrolls

Many legendary adventurers have explored this sacred land before and provided useful scrolls (maps/directions) for new commers. I found these scrolls to be useful:

* [Linux Kernel Development](https://www.amazon.com/Linux-Kernel-Development-Robert-Love/dp/0672329468)
* [Linux Kernel Workbook](https://lkw.readthedocs.io/)
* [The Guild's Map](https://elixir.bootlin.com) - I follow v4.4

It's been around two weeks since I ventured into the unknown. Here's my first journal entry...

# Journal Entry #1 - Around Two Weeks

## Tapping Into The Kernel

To get started with inner workings of the kernel, writing `kernel module`s is a good idea.

Here's a template of a kernel module, closely resembling one provided by the Linux Kernel Workbook.

mymodule.c
```C
#include <linux/init.h>
#include <linux/module.h>

static int __init my_init(void) {
  printk(KERN_INFO "Loading mymodule\n"); //Remember to add \n to make `dmesg` prints messages as expected
  return 0;
}

static void __exit my_exit(void) {
  printk(KERN_INFO "Cleaning up mymodule\n")
}

module_init(my_init);
module_exit(my_exit);

MODULE_DESCRIPTION("Sample Hello World Module");
MODULE_AUTHOR("Rishi Agrawal <rishi.b.agrawal@gmail.com>");
MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");
```

Makefile
```Makefile
MODULE_FILENAME=mymodule

obj-m +=  $(MODULE_FILENAME).o
KO_FILE=$(MODULE_FILENAME).ko

export KROOT=/lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build

modules:
        @$(MAKE) -C $(KROOT) M=$(PWD) modules

clean: 
        @$(MAKE) -C $(KROOT) M=$(PWD) clean
        rm -rf   Module.symvers modules.order

insert: modules
        sudo insmod $(KO_FILE)
        sudo dmesg -c

remove:
        sudo rmmod $(MODULE_FILENAME)
        sudo dmesg -c
```

## What Kernel Functions/Variables are Available in Kernel Module?

I've found these are generally available to be used in a kernel module code:

1. Marked as 'T' or 'D' in `/proc/kallsyms`
2. Defined in kernel code (provided you `include` appropriate header files)

For example: `task_struct` is defined in `include/linux/sched.h`. Therefore, by `#include <linux/sched.h>`, I can now use it in my kernel module.

## Useful Snippets

* Iterating over all `task_struct`:
  ```C
  #include <linux/sched.h>
  task_struct *ptr;
  for_each_process(ptr){ 
    printk(KERN_INFO "This process' PID is %d", ptr->pid);
  }
  ```

  => Question: How do you know about `for_each_process`? - the Elders' scrolls.
  => Question: I want to see its definition in the kernel code, how? - [The Guild's Map](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v4.4/A/ident/for_each_process)

  **Notes**:
    * [Formatting `printk`](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/printk-formats.txt)

* Readily available `task_struct` pointers:
  * `current`: pointer to the task being executed
  * `init_task`: the first task (not a pointer); note that this is not the `task_struct` of the *init process* - which is actually the `list_entry(init_task.next, struct task_struct, tasks)` - explained below. Another adventurer described his experience with this phenomenon in the kernel land in the [Adventurer Camp's Tavern](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/33583323/confusion-about-init-task-pid-0-or-pid-1). 

  Here's my useless version of `for_each_process(struct task_struct *ptr)`

  ```C
  #include <linux/sched.h>
  #include <linux/list.h>

  void my_for_each_process(void) {
    struct task_struct *ptr = &init_task;
    struct list_head *tasks = &(ptr->tasks);
    do {    
      //Do something stupid to the task_struct being iterated through ptr
      ptr = list_entry(tasks->next, struct task_struct, tasks);
      tasks = &(ptr->tasks);
    } while ((tasks->next) && ptr != &init_task); // the second check is because task_struct is a circular list
  }
  ```

  **Note**: While the kernel's version starts from the actual *init process*, this version goes from the `init_task`. Therefore, this version has one iteration more than the kernel's, which is for the `init_task`'s `task_struct`.

  Above convoluted code simply loops through all the `task_struct`s in the kernel. It certainly looks more complicated than what a user land inhabitant would expect. Here is how to interpret this phenomenon:

  * `task_struct` is a *circular doubly-linked list*.
  * *doubly-linked list*'s implementation in the kernel is creatively interesting:
    * a `task_struct` contains a struct `list_head` named `tasks`.
    * `list_head` is defined in `/include/linux/types.h` as follows:
      ```C
      struct list_head {
      	struct list_head *next, *prev;
      };
      ```
    * `list_entry(ptr, type, member)` as documented [here](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v4.4/source/include/linux/list.h#L351) is a *macro* that will return the *container* of a `list_head` pointer. That's why `list_entry(init_task.next, struct task_struct, tasks)` returns the `task_struct` (not pointer) of the *init process*. I bet most of us user land people have never seen such a thing.
    
I have also made a few more interesting encounters but decided to end this entry here because it's late and I need to rest tomorrow's journey starts early...